# Introduction

The GeneXplain platform is an online workbench to assist in operating the daily
computer applications in life sciences. It comprises a number of bioinformatics
and systems biological modules, or BRICKS, which are unified under a
standardized interface, with a consistent look-and-feel. These Bricks can be put
together to comprehensive workflows using a workflow management system, which is
intuitively handled through a simple drag-and-drop system. With this systems,
the user can edit the predefined as well as compose own workflows. Own Bricks
can easily be added as JavaScript or R scripts and incorporated into workflows
as well.

The whole system aims at covering, with time, all areas of computational
applications. The community is invited to contribute Bricks, either as
public-domain or as a commercial part of the platform. We are confident that
this way, an extremely powerful system will grow in which a user-driven
selection will ensure the best tools being the most successful ones.

Besides providing a wide range of sophisticated Bricks (more than 60), the
geneXplain platform also facilitates standard analyses through a number  of
pre-composed workflows presently subsumed under 8 categories.

The technology behind the geneXplain platform is BioUML, which has been
developed for many years at the Institute of Systems Biology in Novosibirsk. The
architecture is open, so that own scripts can be easily loaded into the system,
and new Bricks can be programmed and added by each skilled person.

In the following, we will guide you through the pre-defined workflows, but
before that we are going to introduce you to the different parts of the system in a
more systematic way.

Have fun with the system, and donâ€™t hesitate to come back to us with any
suggestion for improvements (info\@genexplain.com), we know that there is still
ample space to make the system better.
